Now the 37 practice of the bodhic
sattva sam
offers practical advice for those who
really want to practice bodhicitta
u in their daily
life and want to take the bodhic sattva
journey bodhic sattva path. So uh we
have a good chance
to understand how to practice
bodhicitta based on uh this teaching 37
practice.
Um so this
text has as I said 37 verses and uh each
describes a specific practice
uh essential for the bodhicatta
path. Um so please
um
um write down something that you really
want to practice and put into your
practice in daily. Uh you have to write
down otherwise you are going to forget.
Um so we're going to talk and study all
the 37 verses step by step during this
retreat.
Um uh this is a kind of short text but
it
covers
profound
topics. Um and it um contains the
essential points
um and it
um
summarize
the meaning of
um great teachings as the bodhicara
avatara.
uh it also contains all the topics from
the mind train and
teachings and all of these are practice
of bodhic
satza. So we're going through all these
uh 37 verses.
Uh but um it might be um
helpful if I first to give you uh the
summary of this teaching. Um that's all
my uh always my
teachers when
they start this teaching they give the
summary so that you can keep um in your
mind. So it has um three main
principles. Uh first cultivating the
motivation to follow the bodhicatta
path.
Second uh engaging in the specific
trainings of the bodhic sattva path and
third
uh integrating those practice into your
life. So
first few verses emphasize um renouncing
worldly
attachments. They um
encourage practitioners to reflect on
the nature of life such as uh you know
suffering of samsara, benefits of uh
seeking liberation for the sake of all
sentient beings.
And then the following verses describe
the specific practices uh bodhic sattva
should
cultivate. They explain how to
overcome negative emotions and how to
use difficult
situation including harm caused by
others as an opportunities to cultivate
the six perfections
paramas. Um and then the final verses
focus on how to follow the bodhicatta
path like uh practicing the union of
bodhicitta and
emptiness which is the uh heart essence
of the bodhicattva journey. So each
verse serve as
a contemplation to help us
uh face our lives more uh how do I say
skillfully as well as an instruction
from
um the mind the instructions for uh
meditation. So this teaching is
a very um I would say practical guides
for anyone who wish to
uh develop both uh you know uh relative
and ultimate bodhicitta.
So I feel extremely fortunate to have
received this teaching from both
Ken and Kiuno not just once but many
many
times I
memorized this text when I was 11 years
old.
Uh one time Kiapuno gave us this
teaching and said that it is very
profound and some of these verses may be
difficult to practice right now but
uh in he you know encouraged us uh not
to lose your
motivation or your strength because
eventually we will be able to put them
into
practice. And he
also said that we should not consider
the
dharma as
simply trying uh to um receive
blessings.
Um did not like that. just you uh don't
practice but just say
prayers that's um not real or genuine
dharma practitioners do. So we need to
make an effort to practice what we have
learned otherwise everything
um intellectual. So dharma teachings is
something we must uh personally put into
action as much as possible and use this
great opportunity.
So this text summarize the
entire bodhic sattva path and offers
excellent
um py instructions for uh mahayana
practice. um it is not only popular in
all schools of Tibetan Buddhism but also
studied and
practiced by Buddhists from many many
different uh parts of the world. So this
teaching is one of the
uh puns favorite
teachings and uh
um he you know considered most important
teaching and Kimu Panzo frequently
taught this text at um Langar uh his
monastery and also when he visited
monasteries different place in Tibet, he
would sometimes give the teachings in
great detail um other times more sort of
concisely and sometimes he given only
the oral transmissions he always
whenever he um you know visited in Tibet
different monasteries he always uh focus
on these teachings if he doesn't have
time then he gave transmission that or
reading transmission
um so that's the that's a short
introduction of this teaching.
Okay. Now you have the text, right? You
should uh look at the um the first the
text start with a Sanskrit which
is right. Um it is another name uh for
aalog.
Um so what is the reason why he um to um
pays homage to a load at the beginning
of uh this
text. It is because a loadara
uh is the
uh physical manifestation of compassion
of all bodhic
sattvas and uh um among the qualities of
Buddha the main quality is compassion.
Right?
So uh
[Music]
um so
uh compassion
um is the manifestation of the
compassion right so compassion is the
most important qualities of Buddha or
bodhic sattva Buddha said, you know,
whenever there is there is a space,
there are sentient beings, right?
Wherever sentient beings are, they are
negative emotions and unhappiness.
Therefore, if we wish for
others, including ourselves, to overcome
suffering, then compassion is important.
And
um in the madame Shandanda says
compassion is the most important seed of
uh enlightenment Buddhahood in the
beginning, middle and the
end. So there are
u three main qualities
uh that are possessed by the Buddhas.
wisdom, compassion and power, right?
Wisdom, compassion and power. That's the
uh
qualities Buddhas, you
know. And augishwara is known as the
bodhic sattva embodying the compassion
of all Buddhas. So
here pay homage to
himalog because this text explains that
the the the the practice of bodhicattas
are based on
bodhicitta and
compassion. Uh in that sense he is the
embodiment of all
compassion. Okay that's the why the
reason why he pay homage with um what do
you call it? uh
now the next it
says okay I will I will recite Tibetan
too because so that you can uh you
receive the transmission okay uh by the
way told us he really wanted uh study
this teaching like receive transmissions
from uh different teachers he wished
that 100 times in his life I want to
receive this teaching hund times from
different teachers. I'm not sure he
really did that, but he received lots
many many times. That's for sure. Right.
So, you have this transmission from
Okay. And then goes back to um all the
way. So, it says in Tibetan
laws. You see that all phenomena are
beyond coming and going. Yet still you
strive solely for the sake of all
sentient beings. My precious guru and
Lord Aalogit with respect I pay homage
forever through the three
guess. So this u this verse beautifully
captures the profound essence of the
Mahayana
part which is wisdom and compassion
together. You it says you see that all
things are beyond common and going. This
refers to the realization of the
ultimate
truth.
Um relatively sentient
beings exist
uh and they are sovereign also exist
right they arise and dissolve uh based
on cause and conditions but ultimately
they all are
empty that's why I say yet still you
strive solely for the sake of all
sentient beings the Word yet still here
yet still suggests that uh they can um
perceive the relative and ultimate truth
at the same
time.
Um the ability to perceive the two
truths uh simultaneously is an
enlightened quality.
It comes from their recognition of the
dharmakaya and nmakaya nature or their
realization of uh as a wisdom and
compassion. So that's what you call it
uh ultimate bodhicitta relative
bodhicitta. So therefore
uh to pays homage to uh his precious
guru and
aalogi. Um as you know in Mahayana
Buddhism the guru is the one who uh
guides us on the path and
um connect us to the dharma. Therefore,
gurus are truly precious. Um, whatever
small
realization we have gained through
practice is due to the kindness of our
gurus and for that reason to here pays
homage to them.
Um,
Gamba says,
um, it's like traveling through an
unfamiliar and kind of dangerous place.
Uh, in such situation, we need someone
to guide us along the path and help us
um reach our destination, right?
Otherwise it's dangerous right that's
why it says here with respect I pay
homage forever through the three gates
way
so the root gurus they uh Buddhism in
order to practice Buddhism we need a
teacher otherwise Buddhism is profound
it's vast but it's also really
complicated um and so it's we will not
uh without gurus uh it's impossible to
practice um Buddhism uh without any sort
of um uh mistake right so therefore
um pays homage to his root guru
and so and then he said with with
respect I pay homage forever ever
through three guests. This reflects a
sort of wholehearted expression of um
gratitude, right? We offer homage
through
um uh three gets way meaning body,
speech and mind. Um and then also
forever, not just in this moment, right?
But forever. Um and so three gets with
three doors body, speech and mind. Uh
like your physical homage um uh includes
offering you know
prostitutations and uh showing sort of
respect
uh um so on and verbal homage um uh
involves offering like prayers rest
recitations recite the mantras so on and
then mental
homage is
um generating your devotion, your faith
uh and uh most importantly remembering
their
kindness. Um
so the meaning of this verse is the
essence of the bodhic sattva's practice
uh the realization of the ultimate
nature of reality while uh
remaining actively engaged for the
benefit of all sentient beings. Okay. So
that's the summary of this verse. Um the
next verse is
the perfect Buddha's source of all
happiness and well-being arise through
accompilation the genuine dharma since
that and depends on knowing how to
practice thus I will explain the
practice of the bodhic
sattvas this verse is
the hormas by the the author uh to
compose this text and um um a um
statement of his intention and in
explanation of the reason for the uh for
the composition. So this kind of uh
commitment is important and it's
necessary that once we uh once we have
begun uh something uh we should we
should actually go through the process
of doing it um no matter how difficult
it is otherwise we never uh ever you
know achieve that goal. Um so the first
line of this verse refers to the goal of
this teaching which is to achieve
liberation. Uh it says source of all
happiness and well-being.
Okay. Happiness refers to freedom
from physical suffering and wellbeing
refers to freedom from mental suffering.
here. Okay. Um we we we have a great
deal of mental suffering, unhappiness
and worry, you know. Um so by by relying
on the dharma teachings, we can
transform our uh situation of physical
and mental suffering into genuine um
happiness. And to achieve that we must
practice dharma. Must practice dharma
which refers to the teachings of the
Buddha. That's why uh the Buddhas are
the source of happiness and
wellbe.
Um that's what this verse means. Right?
However, some people uh might wonder you
know in the world in this world there
are those who um appreciate Buddhism um
and those who do not like Buddhism right
um many like non Buddhist um experience
suffering many Buddhist practitioners
also face unhappiness suffering so it
doesn't matter who we are. We suffer
half of the time. We are happy half of
the time. Because of this, many people,
you know, have doubt
um whether the source of happiness and
well-being truly come comes from
practice and
dharma. They think even after practice
and dharma, I still experience
suffering, unhappiness. So what's the
difference? Right? Um this um um
skepticism arises from uh uh uh my my
opinion a misunderstanding of the
purpose of dharma.
Whether you are a Buddhist practitioner
or not, um as long as you
are remain um sort of caught in
samsara, you will inevitably you know
like experience both happiness and and
and
suffering. Dharma practice doesn't uh
immediately uh eliminate all sufferings.
uh it takes time to transform the mind.
That's why even Buddhist practitioners
still face difficulties and you know
sufferings. But the the the true purpose
of dharma practice is not to
um um instantly eliminate all problems
but it it is uh transform how we uh
perceive and respond to unhappiness. Um
with the dharma practice we uh develop
the
inner strength to face
uh challenges without being
overwhelmed. Uh without dharma practice
unhappiness controls us but with it we
learn to control how unhappiness affects
us.
Um in this way dharma practice makes a
profound difference
uh not necessarily in the you know outer
conditions of life but in how we
experience and
uh relate to
them. It's like um in the sutras say
it's like you know imagine two
people cut in a storm one know how to
navigate it and feels less
fear while the other does not. So we
need to uh that's kind of you know
Buddhist practitioner or non Buddhist
practitioner. I think that's the
difference. So we need to contemplate in
our mind how we can uh cut the root
cause of um unhappiness and suffering.
Um that's that. And then the second line
of this verse
uh it says
arise through accomplishing the genuine
dharma.
It shows us the result of practice and
dharma and is is proof. Uh if you wish
to attain enlightenment
um you need to rely upon the dharma
teachings. Then where do Buddhas come
from? In the very beginning, Buddhas and
us like sentient beings were exactly the
same both were ordinary
beings. But because of their practice of
the
dharma, they became a
Buddhas. Therefore, it says that the
perfect Buddhas arise through a
completion the genuine dharma.
So that
means we have a great potential to be
enlightened within even this
lifetime. If we have enough practice
dharma and by following the genuine
dharma we can be like those great
enlightened beings.
So we
have reasons to
optimistic. The potential is already
here. So we have to believe in
ourselves. We can do this.
So if we want to practice
dharma, we need to know how to do it
correctly,
right? Whether we are engaged in the
cultivation of
meditation, the recitation of uh mantras
and so forth. All these are to be done
based on bodhicitta
practice and applying the correct
methods of practice. Therefore, this
text 37 practice of bodhic satta will
explain how the the the actual practice
is to be done by someone on the path of
a bodhic satta.
Okay. Like that.